extensions/stac-eo-spec.md, before:

# STAC EO Extension Spec

This document explains the fields of the STAC Earth Observation (EO) Extension to a STAC `Item`. EO data is considered to be data that represents a snapshot of the earth for a single date and time. It could consist of multiple spectral bands in any part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Examples of EO data include sensors with visible, short-wave and mid-wave IR bands (e.g., the OLI instrument on Landsat-8), long-wave IR bands (e.g. TIRS aboard Landsat-8), as well as SAR instruments (e.g. Sentinel-1).

## Using Collections

A lot of EO data will have common metadata across many `Items`. It is not necessary, but recommended to use the [Collections extension](stac-collection-spec.md). While the exact metadata that would appear in a `Collection` record will vary depending on the dataset, the most common collection-level metadata fields are indicated with an * in the tables below.

## EO Extension Description
These are fields that extend the `Item` and `Dataset` object
## `Item` and `Dataset` additions

| element          | type info             | name                                             | description                                                  | scopes         |
| ---------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------- |
| eo:gsd           | number                | Ground Sample distance (required)                | The nominal distance between pixel centers available, in meters | Item           |
| eo:platform      | string                | Unique name of platform (required)               | Specific name of the platform (e.g., landsat-8, sentinel-2A, larrysdrone) | Item + Dataset |
| eo:constellation | string                | constellation the platform belongs to (required) | Name of the group or constellation the platform belongs to   | Item + Dataset |
| eo:instrument    | string                | Instrument used (required)                       | Name of instrument or sensor (e.g., MODIS, ASTER, OLI, Canon F-1) | Item + Dataset |
| eo:bands         | {Band Object}         | Band Info (required)                             | Band specific metadata (see below)                           | Item + Dataset |
| eo:epsg          | number                | EPSG code                                        | EPSG code of the datasource, null if no EPSG code            | Item + Dataset |
| eo:cloud_cover   | number                | Cloud Cover                                      | Percent of cloud cover (0-100)                               | Item           |
| eo:off_nadir     | number                | Off nadir                                        | Viewing angle. 0-90 degrees, measured from nadir             | Item + Dataset |
| eo:azimuth       | number                | Azimuth                                          | Viewing azimuth angle. 0-360 degrees, measured clockwise from north | Item + Dataset |
| eo:sun_azimuth   | number                | Sun Azimuth                                      | Sun azimuth angle. 0-360 degrees, measured clockwise from north | Item           |
| eo:sun_elevation | number                | Sun Elevation                                    | Sun elevation angle. 0-90 degrees measured from horizon      | Item           |
| eo:asset_schema  | {Asset Schema Object} | Asset Schema                                     | TODO                                                         | Dataset        |
| eo:nodata        | [number]              | Nodata values                                    | The no data value(s).                                        | Dataset        |
| eo:pyramid       | {Pyramid Object}      | Pyramid parameters                               | TODO                                                         | Dataset        |
| eo:periodicity   | string                | Periodicity                                      | ISO8601                                                      | Dataset        |

## `Item` and `Dataset` Field Descriptions

**eo:gsd** is the nominal Ground Sample Distance for the data, as measured in meters on the ground. Since GSD can vary across a scene depending on projection, this should be the average or most commonly used GSD in the center of the image. If the data includes multiple bands with different GSD values, this should be the value for the greatest number or most common bands. For instance, Landsat optical and short-wave IR bands are all 30 meters, but the panchromatic band is 15 meters. The eo:gsd should be 30 meters in this case since those are the bands most commonly used.

**eo:platform** is the name of the specific platform the instrument is attached to. For satellites this would be the name of the satellite (e.g., landsat-8, sentinel-2A), whereas for drones this would be a unique name for the drone.

**eo:constellation** is the name of the group or constellation that the platform belongs to.  Example: The Sentinel-2 group has S2A and S2B, this field allows users to search for Sentinel-2 data without needing to specify which specific platform the data came from.

**eo:instrument** The instrument is the name of the sensor used, although for Items which contain data from multiple sensors this could also name multiple sensors. For example, data from the Landsat-8 platform is collected with the OLI sensor as well as the TIRS sensor, but the data is distributed together and commonly referred to as OLI_TIRS.

**eo:bands** This is a dictionary of band information where each key in the dictionary is an identifier for the band (e.g., "B01", "B02", "B1", "B5", "QA"). See below for more information on band metadata.

**eo:epsg**: A Coordinate Reference System (CRS) is the native reference system (sometimes called a 'projection') used by the data, and can usually be referenced using an [EPSG code](http://epsg.io). If the data does not have a CRS, such as in the case of non-rectified imagery with Ground Control Points, eo:epsg should be set to null. It should also be set to null if a CRS exists, but for which there is no valid EPSG code.

**eo:cloud_cover**: An estimate of cloud cover as a percentage of the entire scene. If not available the field should not be provided.

**eo:off_nadir**: The angle from the sensor between nadir (straight down) and the scene center. Measured in degrees (0-90).

**eo:azimuth**: The angle measured from the sub-satellite point (point on the ground below the platform) between the scene center and true north. Measured clockwise in degrees (0-360)

**eo:sun_azimuth**: From the scene center point on the ground, this is the angle between truth north and the sun. Measured clockwise in degrees (0-360).

**eo:sun_elevation**: This is the angle from the tangent of ths scene center point to the sun. Measured in degrees (0-90).

## `eo:bands`
The bands field of a `Item` is a dictionary where the index identifies a specific band. This is often a band number (e.g., 1, B1, B01), but could be any unique identifier.

| element             | type info | name                       | description                                                  |
| ------------------- | --------- | -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| common_name         | string    | Common name                | The name commonly used to refer to this specific band (see below) |
| gsd                 | number    | Ground sample distance     | The average distance between pixel centers as measured in meters on the ground. Defaults to eo:gsd if not provided |
| accuracy            | number    | Geolocation Accuracy       | The expected accuracy of the scene registration, in meters   |
| center_wavelength   | number    | Center wavelength          | The center wavelength of the band, in microns                |
| full_width_half_max | number    | Full width at half maximum | The width of the band, as measured at half the maximum transmission, in microns |
| nodata              | [number]  | Nodata values              | The no data value(s).                                        |
| offset              | number    | Offset                     | Offset to convert band values to the actual measurement scale. |
| scale               | number    | Scale                      | Scale to convert band values to the actual measurement scale. |
| unit                | string    | Unit                       | The unit of measurement, preferably SI. TODO: Check what units are allowed, e.g. link to [UDUNITS](https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/udunits/) or [the dictionary of UoM](https://www.unc.edu/~rowlett/units/). |

## `Item:eo:bands` Field Descriptions

**common_name** is a name commonly used to refer to the band to make it easier to search for bands across instruments. See below for a list of accepted common names.

**gsd** is the nominal Ground Sample Distance for this band, as measured in meters on the ground. Since GSD can vary across a scene depending on projection, this should be the average GSD in the center of the image.

**accuracy** is the expected error between the measured location and the true location of a pixel, in meters on the ground.

**center_wavelength** is the center wavelength of the band, measured in microns.

**full_width_half_max** (FWHM) is a common way to describe the size of a spectral band. It is the width, in microns, of the bandpass measured at a half of the maximum transmission. Thus, if the maximum transmission of the bandpass was 80%, the FWHM is measured as the width of the bandpass at 40% transmission.

## Common Band Names
The band's common_name is the name that is commonly used to refer to that band's spectral properties. The table below shows the common name based on the average band range for the band numbers of several popular instruments.

| Common Name | Band Range (μm) | Landsat 5 | Landsat 7 | Landsat 8 | Sentinel 2 | MODIS |
| ----------- | --------------- | --------- | --------- | --------- | ---------- | ----- |
| coastal     | 0.40 - 0.45     |           |           | 1         | 1          |       |
| blue        | 0.45 - 0.5      | 1         | 1         | 2         | 2          | 3     |
| green       | 0.5 - 0.6       | 2         | 2         | 3         | 3          | 4     |
| red         | 0.6 - 0.7       | 3         | 3         | 4         | 4          | 1     |
| pan         | 0.5 - 0.7       |           | 8         | 8         |            |       |
| nir         | 0.77 - 1.00     | 4         | 4         | 5         | 8          | 2     |
| cirrus      | 1.35 - 1.40     |           |           | 9         | 10         | 26    |
| swir16      | 1.55 - 1.75     | 5         | 5         | 6         | 11         | 6     |
| swir22      | 2.1 - 2.3       | 7         | 7         | 7         | 12         | 7     |
| lwir11      | 10.5 - 11.5     |           |           | 10        |            | 31    |
| lwir12      | 11.5 - 12.5     |           |           | 11        |            | 32    |

Commit message:

Added a description field to the bands.

extensions/stac-eo-spec.md, after:

# STAC EO Extension Spec

This document explains the fields of the STAC Earth Observation (EO) Extension to a STAC `Item`. EO data is considered to be data that represents a snapshot of the earth for a single date and time. It could consist of multiple spectral bands in any part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Examples of EO data include sensors with visible, short-wave and mid-wave IR bands (e.g., the OLI instrument on Landsat-8), long-wave IR bands (e.g. TIRS aboard Landsat-8), as well as SAR instruments (e.g. Sentinel-1).

## Using Collections

A lot of EO data will have common metadata across many `Items`. It is not necessary, but recommended to use the [Collections extension](stac-collection-spec.md). While the exact metadata that would appear in a `Collection` record will vary depending on the dataset, the most common collection-level metadata fields are indicated with an * in the tables below.

## EO Extension Description
These are fields that extend the `Item` and `Dataset` object
## `Item` and `Dataset` additions

| element          | type info             | name                                             | description                                                  | scopes         |
| ---------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------- |
| eo:gsd           | number                | Ground Sample distance (required)                | The nominal distance between pixel centers available, in meters | Item           |
| eo:platform      | string                | Unique name of platform (required)               | Specific name of the platform (e.g., landsat-8, sentinel-2A, larrysdrone) | Item + Dataset |
| eo:constellation | string                | constellation the platform belongs to (required) | Name of the group or constellation the platform belongs to   | Item + Dataset |
| eo:instrument    | string                | Instrument used (required)                       | Name of instrument or sensor (e.g., MODIS, ASTER, OLI, Canon F-1) | Item + Dataset |
| eo:bands         | {Band Object}         | Band Info (required)                             | Band specific metadata (see below)                           | Item + Dataset |
| eo:epsg          | number                | EPSG code                                        | EPSG code of the datasource, null if no EPSG code            | Item + Dataset |
| eo:cloud_cover   | number                | Cloud Cover                                      | Percent of cloud cover (0-100)                               | Item           |
| eo:off_nadir     | number                | Off nadir                                        | Viewing angle. 0-90 degrees, measured from nadir             | Item + Dataset |
| eo:azimuth       | number                | Azimuth                                          | Viewing azimuth angle. 0-360 degrees, measured clockwise from north | Item + Dataset |
| eo:sun_azimuth   | number                | Sun Azimuth                                      | Sun azimuth angle. 0-360 degrees, measured clockwise from north | Item           |
| eo:sun_elevation | number                | Sun Elevation                                    | Sun elevation angle. 0-90 degrees measured from horizon      | Item           |
| eo:asset_schema  | {Asset Schema Object} | Asset Schema                                     | TODO                                                         | Dataset        |
| eo:nodata        | [number]              | Nodata values                                    | The no data value(s).                                        | Dataset        |
| eo:pyramid       | {Pyramid Object}      | Pyramid parameters                               | TODO                                                         | Dataset        |
| eo:periodicity   | string                | Periodicity                                      | ISO8601                                                      | Dataset        |

## `Item` and `Dataset` Field Descriptions

**eo:gsd** is the nominal Ground Sample Distance for the data, as measured in meters on the ground. Since GSD can vary across a scene depending on projection, this should be the average or most commonly used GSD in the center of the image. If the data includes multiple bands with different GSD values, this should be the value for the greatest number or most common bands. For instance, Landsat optical and short-wave IR bands are all 30 meters, but the panchromatic band is 15 meters. The eo:gsd should be 30 meters in this case since those are the bands most commonly used.

**eo:platform** is the name of the specific platform the instrument is attached to. For satellites this would be the name of the satellite (e.g., landsat-8, sentinel-2A), whereas for drones this would be a unique name for the drone.

**eo:constellation** is the name of the group or constellation that the platform belongs to.  Example: The Sentinel-2 group has S2A and S2B, this field allows users to search for Sentinel-2 data without needing to specify which specific platform the data came from.

**eo:instrument** The instrument is the name of the sensor used, although for Items which contain data from multiple sensors this could also name multiple sensors. For example, data from the Landsat-8 platform is collected with the OLI sensor as well as the TIRS sensor, but the data is distributed together and commonly referred to as OLI_TIRS.

**eo:bands** This is a dictionary of band information where each key in the dictionary is an identifier for the band (e.g., "B01", "B02", "B1", "B5", "QA"). See below for more information on band metadata.

**eo:epsg**: A Coordinate Reference System (CRS) is the native reference system (sometimes called a 'projection') used by the data, and can usually be referenced using an [EPSG code](http://epsg.io). If the data does not have a CRS, such as in the case of non-rectified imagery with Ground Control Points, eo:epsg should be set to null. It should also be set to null if a CRS exists, but for which there is no valid EPSG code.

**eo:cloud_cover**: An estimate of cloud cover as a percentage of the entire scene. If not available the field should not be provided.

**eo:off_nadir**: The angle from the sensor between nadir (straight down) and the scene center. Measured in degrees (0-90).

**eo:azimuth**: The angle measured from the sub-satellite point (point on the ground below the platform) between the scene center and true north. Measured clockwise in degrees (0-360)

**eo:sun_azimuth**: From the scene center point on the ground, this is the angle between truth north and the sun. Measured clockwise in degrees (0-360).

**eo:sun_elevation**: This is the angle from the tangent of ths scene center point to the sun. Measured in degrees (0-90).

## `eo:bands`
The bands field of a `Item` is a dictionary where the index identifies a specific band. This is often a band number (e.g., 1, B1, B01), but could be any unique identifier.

| element             | type info | name                       | description                                                  |
| ------------------- | --------- | -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| common_name         | string    | Common name                | The name commonly used to refer to this specific band (see below) |
| description         | string    | Description                | Description to fully explain the band. [CommonMark 0.28](http://commonmark.org/) syntax MAY be used for rich text representation. |
| gsd                 | number    | Ground sample distance     | The average distance between pixel centers as measured in meters on the ground. Defaults to eo:gsd if not provided |
| accuracy            | number    | Geolocation Accuracy       | The expected accuracy of the scene registration, in meters   |
| center_wavelength   | number    | Center wavelength          | The center wavelength of the band, in microns                |
| full_width_half_max | number    | Full width at half maximum | The width of the band, as measured at half the maximum transmission, in microns |
| nodata              | [number]  | Nodata values              | The no data value(s).                                        |
| offset              | number    | Offset                     | Offset to convert band values to the actual measurement scale. |
| scale               | number    | Scale                      | Scale to convert band values to the actual measurement scale. |
| unit                | string    | Unit                       | The unit of measurement, preferably SI. TODO: Check what units are allowed, e.g. link to [UDUNITS](https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/udunits/) or [the dictionary of UoM](https://www.unc.edu/~rowlett/units/). |

## `Item:eo:bands` Field Descriptions

**common_name** is a name commonly used to refer to the band to make it easier to search for bands across instruments. See below for a list of accepted common names.

**gsd** is the nominal Ground Sample Distance for this band, as measured in meters on the ground. Since GSD can vary across a scene depending on projection, this should be the average GSD in the center of the image.

**accuracy** is the expected error between the measured location and the true location of a pixel, in meters on the ground.

**center_wavelength** is the center wavelength of the band, measured in microns.

**full_width_half_max** (FWHM) is a common way to describe the size of a spectral band. It is the width, in microns, of the bandpass measured at a half of the maximum transmission. Thus, if the maximum transmission of the bandpass was 80%, the FWHM is measured as the width of the bandpass at 40% transmission.

## Common Band Names
The band's common_name is the name that is commonly used to refer to that band's spectral properties. The table below shows the common name based on the average band range for the band numbers of several popular instruments.

| Common Name | Band Range (μm) | Landsat 5 | Landsat 7 | Landsat 8 | Sentinel 2 | MODIS |
| ----------- | --------------- | --------- | --------- | --------- | ---------- | ----- |
| coastal     | 0.40 - 0.45     |           |           | 1         | 1          |       |
| blue        | 0.45 - 0.5      | 1         | 1         | 2         | 2          | 3     |
| green       | 0.5 - 0.6       | 2         | 2         | 3         | 3          | 4     |
| red         | 0.6 - 0.7       | 3         | 3         | 4         | 4          | 1     |
| pan         | 0.5 - 0.7       |           | 8         | 8         |            |       |
| nir         | 0.77 - 1.00     | 4         | 4         | 5         | 8          | 2     |
| cirrus      | 1.35 - 1.40     |           |           | 9         | 10         | 26    |
| swir16      | 1.55 - 1.75     | 5         | 5         | 6         | 11         | 6     |
| swir22      | 2.1 - 2.3       | 7         | 7         | 7         | 12         | 7     |
| lwir11      | 10.5 - 11.5     |           |           | 10        |            | 31    |
| lwir12      | 11.5 - 12.5     |           |           | 11        |            | 32    |
